# QA/QC criteria

The following lists the pre-defined exclusion criteria for analyses of whole-brain structural and functional connectomes.

## Anatomical MRI

Given our planned analysis, the T1w image will be used for the spatial alignment with the standard MNI152NLin2009cAsym template.
In addition, surface reconstructions from the T1w image will guide the co-registration of structural and functional (BOLD) images in fMRIPrep.
Since the latter preprocessing steps are relatively robust to structural images with mild artifacts, the exclusion criteria for unprocessed T1w images are lenient.
However, individual T1w images may be excluded without such a decision lead to exclusion of the whole session in which it belongs.
We annotate subjects with visible artifacts in the T1w images in order to ensure rigorous scrutinizing of spatial normalization and surface reconstruction outputs from fMRIPrep (if both modalities passed the first QC checkpoint with MRIQC).
The explanation and the description of the flagging criteria 1 to 7 are the same as their counterpart in the previous section.

## Summary

#. Artifactual structures in the background
#. Susceptibility distortion artifacts
#. Aliasing ghosts
#. Wrap-around that overlaps with the brain
#. Data formatting issues
#. Motion-related and Gibbs ringing
#. Extreme intensity non-uniformity
#. Eye spillover

## Artifacts and quality issues that may grant exclusion

### Motion-related and Gibbs ringing

Large head motion during the acquisition of T1w images often expresses itself with the appearance of concentric ripples throughout the scan.
In the most subtle cases, motion-related ripples look similar to the fine lines generated by Gibbs ringing.
The latter emerges as a consequence of the truncation of the Fourier series approximation and appears as multiple fine lines immediately adjacent and parallel to high-contrast interfaces.
While Gibbs ringing is limited to the adjacency of sharp steps in intensity at tissue interfaces, the ripples caused by motion generally span up to the whole brain, and are primarily visible in the sagittal view of MRIQC’s mosaic views.

### Intensity non-uniformity

Intensity non-uniformity is characterized by a smooth variation (low spatial frequency) of intensity throughout the brain, caused by the stronger signal sensed in the proximity of coils.
It is noticeable on the zoomed-in view on the T1w image.
Furthermore, intensity non-uniformity can be a problem for automated processing methods that assume a type of tissue (e.g., white matter (WM)) is represented by voxels of similar intensities across the whole brain.
An extreme intensity non-uniformity can also be the sign of a coil failure.

18. **Eye spillover (Q)**

Eye movements may trigger the leakage of the signal from the eyes through the imaging axis with the lowest bandwidth (i.e., acquired faster) potentially overlapping signal from brain tissue.
On data preserving facial features the streak of signal is visible in the background at the levels of the eyes.
However, because all the data in this study are openly shared after defacing (for privacy protection reasons), the signal around the face has been zeroed, we thus expect this leakage to not be visible (Provins, Alemán-Gómez, et al. 2022)
A strong signal leakage can however be noticeable on the zoomed-in view of the T1w image (see Figure S10G for an example of the latter case).

## Functional MRI

## Summary
1. Artifactual structures in the background
1. Susceptibility distortion artifacts
    1. Signal drop-out
    1. Brain distortion
1. Aliasing ghosts
1. Wrap-around that overlaps with the brain 
1. Structured crown region in the carpet plot
    1. due to motion peaks
    1. due to periodic motion
    1. due to coil failure
    1. drift of unknown source
1. Artifacts detected with independent components analysis
1. Hyperintensities of single slice
1. Vertical strikes in the sagittal plane of the standard deviation map
1. Data formatting issues

## Details
1. **Artifactual structures in the background (A)**

Because no BOLD signal originates from the air surrounding the head, the background should not contain visible structures.
However, signals sourcing from the object of interest can spill into the background through a number of imaging processes, e.g., aliasing ghosts, spill-over originating from moving and blinking eyes, or bulk head motion.
Structures in the background are most clearly noticeable in MRIQC’s “background noise panel” view, but they frequently are also detectable in the standard deviation map view.
Structure in the background is not a problem in itself as it is situated outside of the brain; the issue is that the latter artifact is likely overflowing on the brain, thus compromising brain signal.
The aliasing ghost is a particular case of structure in the background, discussed in further detail in criterion C below.
We classify under exclusion criteria A all other structures that do not correspond to an aliasing artifact.

1. **Susceptibility distortion artifacts (B)**

Susceptibility distortions are caused by B0 field non-uniformity (Hutton et al. 2002).
Indeed, inserting an object in the scanner bore perturbs the nominal B0 field, which should be constant all across the FoV.
Specifically, tissue boundaries produce steps of deviation from the nominal B0 field, which are larger where the air is close to tissues.
Because of these deviations, the signal is recorded at locations slightly displaced from the sampling grid along the phase encoding axis leading to susceptibility distortions (Esteban et al. 2021).
Susceptibility distortions manifest in two different ways on the BOLD average panel of the MRIQC visual report (Figure S2): as signal drop-out, that is a region where the signal vanishes (criterion BA), or as brain distortions (criterion BB).
Signal drop-outs often appear close to brain-air interfaces as explained below; these include ventro-medial prefrontal cortex, the anterior part of the prefrontal cortex and the region next to the ear cavities.
Susceptibility distortion artifacts can be corrected by the susceptibility distortion correction implemented in fMRIPrep, provided that a fieldmap associated to the BOLD image has been acquired and is correctly referenced in the dataset.
This means that the presence of susceptibility distortions does not necessarily constitute an exclusion criterion.
However, given the application scope of this paper, since no fieldmaps were shared with the dataset and because we did not identify regions of little interest where these artifacts may be less detrimental, any signal drop-out observed results in exclusion of the scan.
In practice, legacy datasets without fieldmaps can still be usable if researchers take adequate mitigation approaches (which also require rigorous QA/QC).

1. **Aliasing ghost (C)**

A ghost is a type of structured noise that appears as shifted and faint repeated versions of the main object, usually in the phase encoding direction.
They occur for several reasons, such as signal instability between pulse cycle repetitions, or the particular strategy of echo-planar imaging to record the k-space during acquisition, and is often exacerbated by within-volume head motion.
Sometimes it can be spotted in the BOLD average view of the MRIQC visual report, but it is most clear in the background noise visualization.
We exclude the scans for which the ghost was approximately the same intensity as the interior of the brain in the background noise visualization.

1. **Wrap-around (D)**

Wrap-around occurs whenever the dimensions of the object exceed the defined field-of-view (FOV).
It is visible as a piece of the head being folded over on the opposite extreme of the image.
We exclude subjects based on the observation of a wrap-around, only if the folded region contains or overlaps the cortex.
In the MRIQC visual report, the wrap-around can be spotted on the BOLD average, on the standard deviation map and on the background noise visualization.
However, we found that the background noise visualization is the most clear to assess whether the folded region overlaps the brain
Note that increasing your screen brightness helps when looking for both aliasing ghosts and wrap-around overlapping the brain, as low brightness makes the artifacts harder to see.

1. **Assessment of time-series with the carpet plot (E)**

    The carpet plot is a tool to visualize changes in voxel intensity throughout an fMRI scan
It works by plotting voxel time-series in close spatial proximity so that the eye notes temporal coincidence (Power 2017)
Both MRIQC and fMRIPrep generate carpet plots segmented in relevant regions
One particular innovation of these carpet plots is that they contain a “crown” area corresponding to voxels located on a closed-band around the brain’s outer edge
As those voxels are outside the brain, we do not expect signal there, meaning that if some signal is observed, we can interpret it as artifactual
Therefore, a strongly structured crown region in the carpet plot is a sign that artifacts are compromising the fMRI scan (Provins, Markiewicz, et al. 2022)
For example, motion peaks are generally paired with prolonged dark deflections derived from spin-history effects (criterion EA)
Periodic modulations on the carpet plot are indicative of regular, slow motion, e.g., caused by respiration, which may also compromise the signal of interest (criterion EB)
Furthermore, coil failures may be identifiable as a sudden change in overall signal intensity on the carpet plot and generally sustained through the end of the scan (criterion EC)
In addition, sorting the rows (i.e., the time-series) of each segment of the carpet plot such that voxels with similar BOLD dynamics appear close to one another reveals non-global structure in the signal, that is obscured when voxels are ordered randomly (Aquino et al. 2020)
Thus, strongly polarized structure in the carpet plot also suggests artifact influence (criterion ED)
Finding clear temporal patterns that are similar in gray matter areas and simultaneously in regions of no interest (for instance, cerebrospinal fluid or the crown) indicates the presence of artifacts, typically derived from head motion
If the planned analysis specifies noise regression techniques based on information picked up from these regions of no interest (which is standard and recommended, (Ciric et al. 2017)), the risk of removing signals with neural origin is then high, and affected scans should be excluded.

1. **Artifacts detected with independent components analysis (F)**

    MRIQC was run with the --ica argument, which generates an independent component decomposition using FSL MELODIC (version 5.0.11; Beckmann and Smith 2004)
Such techniques have been thoroughly described elsewhere (Griffanti et al. 2017)
Components are easily screened with the specific visualization “ICA components” in the corresponding BOLD report, and each component is mapped on a glass brain with an indication of their frequency spectrum and their corresponding weight over time
One recurring artifactual family of components emerges when motion interacts with interleaved acquisition giving rise to the so-called spin-history effects
The spin-history effects appear as parallel stripes covering the whole brain in one direction and are a consequence of the repetition time not being much larger than the T1 relaxation time in typical fMRI designs
This implies that the spins will not relax back completely by the time the next acquisition starts (Cusack 2006)
In addition, specific movements (e.g., rotation around one imaging axis, such as nodding) will exacerbate spin-history effects as slices will cut through the brain at different locations between consecutive BOLD time points
These two considerations combined mean that motion will produce spins with different excitation history and thus the signal intensity will be different
Components showcasing parallel stripes concurring with slices in extreme poles of the brain, or even across the whole brain are likely to capture these effects.

1. **Hyperintensity of single slices (G)**

    Above the carpet plot, both MRIQC and fMRIPrep represent several time-series to support the interpretation of the carpet
In particular, the slice-wise z-standardized signal average is useful for detecting sudden “spikes” in average intensity of single slices of BOLD scans
When paired with the motion traces, it is possible to determine whether these spikes are caused by motion or by possible problems with the scanner (e.g., white-pixel noise)
Spikes caused by motion typically affect several or all slices, while spikes caused by white-pixel noise affect only one slice and are generally more acute
White-pixel noise is generally caused by some small pieces of metal in the scan room or a loose screw on the scanner that accumulates energy and then discharges randomly
This creates broad-band RF noise at some point during the signal read-out, leading to one spot in k-space with an abnormally high intensity
In the image domain, it manifests as an abrupt signal intensity change in one slice at one time-point
The problem is particularly acute for EPI scans because of all the gradient blipping during the read-out
For resting-state data, we discard BOLD scans containing these spikes regardless of their physical origin (motion vs. white-pixel noise), because correlation analyses are likely biased by such peaks
Conversely, task data analyses are typically more robust to this particular artifact, therefore the presence of only one or more relatively small spikes leads to the scan being flagged for careful inspection after the preprocessing.

1. **Vertical strikes in the sagittal plane of the standard deviation map (H)**

    The sagittal view of the standard deviation map might show vertical strike patterns that extend hyperintensities through the whole sagittal plane
We exclude all images showcasing these patterns
Although we did not find an explanation of the mechanism behind this artifact, email conversations dating from 2017 seemed to point at an interaction between physiology and environmental issues in the scanning room that may affect the receiver coils.

1. **Data formatting issues (I)**

    As part of the NIfTI format (R.W. Cox et al. 2004), the file header contains metadata storing several relevant parameters, of which the orientation information is critical for the interpretability of the data
The orientation parameters indicate how the data matrix is stored on disk and enable visualizing rows and slices at the correct locations (Glen et al. 2020)
However, mistakes may occur while recording information at the scanner, while converting DICOM to NIFTI format, or during a subsequent processing step
Such mistakes result in the brain image not being correctly visualized and preprocessed, with axes either being flipped (e.g., the anterior part of the brain is labeled as posterior) or switched (e.g., axial slices are interpreted as coronal ones)
These issues may render the dataset unusable, e.g., if the orientation information describing whether the data array has been recorded from left to right or right to left is lost.

## Diffusion MRI

## Physiological recordings

## Eye-tracking

# References

* Aquino, Kevin M., Ben D. Fulcher, Linden Parkes, Kristina Sabaroedin, and Alex Fornito. 2020. “Identifying and Removing Widespread Signal Deflections from FMRI Data: Rethinking the Global Signal Regression Problem.” NeuroImage 212 (May): 116614. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.116614>.

* Behzadi, Yashar, Khaled Restom, Joy Liau, and Thomas T. Liu. 2007. “A Component Based Noise Correction Method (CompCor) for BOLD and Perfusion Based FMRI.” NeuroImage 37 (1): 90–101. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2007.04.042>.

* Ciric, Rastko, Daniel H. Wolf, Jonathan D. Power, David R. Roalf, Graham L. Baum, Kosha Ruparel, Russell T. Shinohara, et al. 2017. “Benchmarking of Participant-Level Confound Regression Strategies for the Control of Motion Artifact in Studies of Functional Connectivity.” NeuroImage, Cleaning up the fMRI time series: Mitigating noise with advanced acquisition and correction strategies, 154: 174–87. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.03.020>.

* Cox, R.W., J. Ashbruner, H. Breman, K. Fissell, C. Haselgrove, and C. J. Holmes. 2004. “A (Sort of) New Image Data Format Standard: NIfTI-1.” In the 10th Annual Meeting of the Organization for Human Brain Mapping in Budapest.

* Cusack, Rhodri. 2006. “CommonArtefacts - MRC CBU Imaging Wiki.” March 2006. <https://imaging.mrc-cbu.cam.ac.uk/imaging/CommonArtefacts>.

* Esteban, Oscar, Azeez Adebimpe, Christopher J. Markiewicz, Mathias Goncalves, Ross W. Blair, Matthew Cieslak, Mikaël Naveau, et al. 2021. “The Bermuda Triangle of D- and f-MRI Sailors - Software for Susceptibility Distortions (SDCFlows).” OSF Preprints. <https://doi.org/10.31219/osf.io/gy8nt>.

* Fischl, Bruce. 2012. “FreeSurfer.” NeuroImage 62 (2): 774–81. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.01.021.

* Glen, Daniel R., Paul A. Taylor, Bradley R. Buchsbaum, Robert W. Cox, and Richard C. Reynolds. 2020. “Beware (Surprisingly Common) Left-Right Flips in Your MRI Data: An Efficient and Robust Method to Check MRI Dataset Consistency Using AFNI.” Frontiers in Neuroinformatics 14. <https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fninf.2020.00018>.

* Hutton, Chloe, Andreas Bork, Oliver Josephs, Ralf Deichmann, John Ashburner, and Robert Turner. 2002. “Image Distortion Correction in FMRI: A Quantitative Evaluation.” NeuroImage 16 (1): 217–40. <https://doi.org/10.1006/nimg.2001.1054>.

* Klapwijk, Eduard T., Ferdi van de Kamp, Mara van der Meulen, Sabine Peters, and Lara M. Wierenga. 2019. “Qoala-T: A Supervised-Learning Tool for Quality Control of FreeSurfer Segmented MRI Data.” NeuroImage 189 (April): 116–29. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.01.014>.

* Power, Jonathan D. 2017. “A Simple but Useful Way to Assess FMRI Scan Qualities.” NeuroImage, Cleaning up the fMRI time series: Mitigating noise with advanced acquisition and correction strategies, 154 (July): 150–58. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.08.009>.

* Provins, Céline, Yasser Alemán-Gómez, Martine Cleusix, Raoul Jenni, Jonas Richiardi, Patric Hagmann, and Oscar Esteban. 2022. “Defacing Biases Manual and Automated Quality Assessments of Structural MRI with MRIQC.” OSF Preprints. <https://doi.org/10.31219/osf.io/8mcyz>.

* Provins, Céline, Christopher J. Markiewicz, Rastko Ciric, Mathias Goncalves, César Caballero-Gaudes, Russell Poldrack, Patric Hagmann, and Oscar Esteban. 2022. “Quality Control and Nuisance Regression of FMRI, Looking out Where Signal Should Not Be Found.” OSF Preprints. <https://doi.org/10.31219/osf.io/hz52v>.

* White, Tonya, Philip R. Jansen, Ryan L. Muetzel, Gustavo Sudre, Hanan El Marroun, Henning Tiemeier, Anqi Qiu, Philip Shaw, Andrew M. Michael, and Frank C. Verhulst. 2018. “Automated Quality Assessment of Structural Magnetic Resonance Images in Children: Comparison with Visual Inspection and Surface-Based Reconstruction.” Human Brain Mapping 39 (3): 1218–31. <https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.23911>.

